# Depression at the intersection of race/ethnicity, sex/gender, and sexual orientation in a nationally representative sample of US adults: A design-weighted MAIHDA
This repository contains data and code used to support the manuscript "Depression at the intersection of race/ethnicity, sex/gender, and sexual orientation in a nationally representative sample of US adults: A design-weighted MAIHDA."

**This manuscript is currently undergoing peer review.** A preprint version (Date: 04/13/2023) is available at:

## Manuscript abstract

This study examined how race/ethnicity, sex/gender, and sexual orientation intersect to socially pattern depression among US adults. We used repeated, cross-sectional data from the 2015-2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH; n=234,772) to conduct design-weighted multilevel analysis of individual heterogeneity and discriminatory accuracy (MAIHDA) for two outcomes: past-year and lifetime major depressive episode (MDE). With 42 intersectional groups constructed from seven race/ethnicity, two sex/gender, and three sexual orientation categories, we estimated group-specific prevalence and excess/reduced prevalence attributable to intersectional effects (i.e., two-way or higher interactions between identity variables). Models revealed heterogeneity between intersectional groups, with prevalence estimates ranging from 3.4–31.4% (past-year) and 6.7–47.4% (lifetime). Model main effects indicated that people who were Multiracial, White, women, gay/lesbian, or bisexual had greater odds of MDE. Additive effects of race/ethnicity, sex/gender, and sexual orientation explained most between-group variance; however, approximately 3% (past-year) and 12% (lifetime) were attributable to intersectional effects, with some groups experiencing excess/reduced prevalence. For both outcomes, sexual orientation main effects (42.9–54.0%) explained a greater proportion of between-group variance relative to race/ethnicity (10.0–17.1%) and sex/gender (7.5–7.9%). Notably, we extend MAIHDA to calculate nationally representative estimates to open future opportunities to quantify intersectionality with complex sample survey data.

## Overview of repository structure/contents

1. Original data downloaded from NSDUH are available in Stata format in the "/01_original_data" folder. Files were too large to be uploaded directly, so they are stored in zip folders. This data is processed/cleaned using the "01_nsduh_dataManagement.R" file to create the final data file ("nsduh.RDS") used for analysis.
2. MAIHDA model fits should be stored in the "/02_fits" folder. However, these files are too large to be stored on GitHub, so please inquire directly to request access to the model fits.
3. Tables and figures that are used in the manuscript are stored in the "/03_tables_figures" folder.
4. All R code for this project is stored in the main folder and is separated into three files: (1) "01_nsduh_dataManagement.R" for data management/cleaning tasks, (2) "02_nsduh_analysis.R" for conducting design-weighted MAIHDA using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), and (3) "03_nsduh_estimates.R" for generating/summarizing estimates (e.g., model-predicted prevalence, excess/reduced prevalence) for each outcome measure.
